## Immediately Invoked Function Expression

Be mindful that this section contains a regular JavaScript interview question. The question is:

**Question:** What is an IIFE (Immediately Invoked Function Expression)?

The short answer is, we create a function and immediately invoke it.

We learned that we can create a function using the `function` keyword:

```
function f() {
    console.log( "f() has been executed" );
}
```

In order to invoke the function, we need to add two parentheses after the name of the function:

```
f();
// Logs: f() has been executed
```

We can combine the function definition and invocation if we place the `()` right after the function definition. To do that, we need to put the function definition in parentheses too:

```
(function f() {
    console.log( "f() has been executed" );
})();
// Logs: f() has been executed
```

Don't forget the parentheses around the function definition. If you omit them, you get an error message:

```
function f() {
    console.log( "f() has been executed" );
}();
// Error: Uncaught SyntaxError: Unexpected token )
```

The name of function `f` does not have any significance in the code, it acts like a comment. We can safely omit the name `f`, creating an *anonymous function*.

```
(function() {
    console.log( "The function has been executed" );
})();
```

It is also possible to pass parameters to immediately invoked function expressions:

```
(function( text ) {
    console.log( text );
})( "The function has been executed" );
```

In the parametrized version, you can write any value in place of the string `"The function has been executed"`.

Starting from ES2015, the 2015 specification of JavaScript, immediately invoked function expressions can also be created using arrow functions:

```
( text => console.log( text ) )( "Done." );
```

This format is not a surprise, because `text => console.log( text )` can be substituted by `console.log` itself. It expects a `text` variable, writes it to the console, and returns `undefined`. If we make this substitution, we get the following expression:

```
( console.log )( "Done." );
```

The parentheses around `console.log` can also be omitted resulting in:

```
console.log( "Done." );
```

### Exercises: Immediately Invoked Function Expressions

**Exercise 36:** Create an immediately invoked function expression that expects two numeric parameters and returning the sum of these two parameters. You can assume that the parameters are numbers, you don't have to check their types.
