## Variables: let, const, and var

In the first few sections, we learned how to use datatypes and how to perform operations on different types of data. However, based on our current knowledge, if we want to perform the same calculation twice in our code, we have to manually copy either the formula or the result. Variables help us automatize and simplify this process by enabling us to access the result of an operation within our code.

First of all, in the below example, you have to know that `console.log` may print any number of arguments separated by commas. In the console, the values appear next to each other separated by a space.

```
> console.log( 1, 2, 3 )
1 2 3
```

Open the console of Google Chrome by right clicking on a website, selecting Inspect from the context menu, and then selecting the Console tab. In the console, you can type the following expressions:

```
> 1
1

> 2 + 3
5

> 'JavaScript'
"JavaScript"

> JavaScript
Uncaught ReferenceError: JavaScript is not defined
    at <anonymous>:1:1
```

While in the first three cases you get two integer and one string results, in the fourth case, you get a reference error. This error appears, because `JavaScript` is a variable, and this variable had not been created in the code.

Before creating this variable, let's clarify what a variable is. In computer programming, variables are like drawers, where we store values.

### The let keyword  

We can create variables with the `let` keyword. Think of a variable like a drawer. Let *declares* a variable, which means to you that a drawer is created with a handle. Declaration is a process that creates a drawer, and hands the key of the drawer to us so that we can access its contents.

```
let myDrawer;
```

You can put a value in your drawer:

```
myDrawer = '$1.000';
```

In order to access the value, you have to grab the *handle* of the drawer and open it. In this example, you have a drawer called `myDrawer`. It contains a string written `'$1.000'` on it. To access your thousand bucks, you have to open the drawer:

```
> myDrawer
'$1.000'
```

You can assign an initial value to your variable with the `=` sign. This is called *assignment*, because we assign a value to a variable. The first assignment in the lifecycle of a variable is called *definition* or *initialization*.

The *declaration* and *initialization* steps can be combined in one step. Let's create a second drawer, where we both declare and initialize a variable:

```
let mySecondDrawer = '$500';
```

Initialization can occur either in the same statement where you declared the variable (see `declaredAndDefined`), or after the declaration (see `declaredButOnlyLaterDefined`). You may access a declared variable even if you have not initialized it. Its value becomes `undefined`.

```
let declaredAndDefined = 5;

let declaredButOnlyLaterDefined;
declaredButOnlyLaterDefined = declaredAndDefined ** 2;

let declaredButNotDefined;

console.log(
    declaredAndDefined,
    declaredButOnlyLaterDefined,
    declaredButNotDefined
);
```

- The variable `declaredAndDefined` is declared on the same line where it is defined
- The variable `declaredButOnlyLaterDefined` is only defined later in another line
- The variable `declaredButNotDefined` is not defined at all, therefore, its value becomes `undefined`

Let's see what happens if we move the line `declaredButNotDefined` below the `console.log` statement.

```
let declaredAndDefined = 5;

let declaredButOnlyLaterDefined;
declaredButOnlyLaterDefined = declaredAndDefined ** 2;

console.log(
    declaredAndDefined,
    declaredButOnlyLaterDefined,
    declaredButNotDefined
);
// The following error message is displayed:
// ReferenceError: declaredButNotDefined is not defined

let declaredButNotDefined;
```

If you execute the above code, a `ReferenceError` should be displayed while executing the `console.log` statement. This is because the following sequence of events: you ask for the contents of your post box in the post office. However, the box you are asking for does not exist in the post office. This box is only accessible once you create it using the statement `let declaredButNotDefined`.

```
console.log( declaredButNotDefined ); // ReferenceError

let declaredButNotDefined;
```

### Constants

Constants behave in a similar way as variables. Constants can be created using the `const` keyword:

```
const PI = 3.14;
```

The value of a constant cannot be changed later:

```
PI = 2;
Uncaught TypeError: Assignment to constant variable.
```

As the value of constants stay unchanged, they have to be initialized in the same statement where they are declared. If we forget this necessary step, we get an error message:

```
const c;
Uncaught SyntaxError: Missing initializer in const declaration
```

### Scope of a variable

The scope of a variable shows where the variable is visible and where it is not.

In JavaScript, there are many different scopes available:

1. Global scope
2. Block scope (`let`, `const`)
3. Function scope (`var`)
4. Lexical scope (see later)
5. Module scope (we will not deal with this scope here)

In most programming languages, the first two scopes are available. Function scope is a unique feature of JavaScript. Since the 2015 version of JavaScript, ES6 (or ES2015), function scope is losing its popularity, as the well known block scoped `let` and `const` variables emerged.

Regarding block scope, blocks can be created anywhere in your code. Blocks are created using braces (`{` and `}`):

```
{
    // This is a block
}
```

Variables created using `let` and `const` are only visible inside the block where they are created:

```
{
    let box = 5;
    console.log( box );
}
```

The above code displays the value of `box`.

```
{
    let innerBox = 6;
}
console.log( innerBox );
```

In the above code segment, we get a `ReferenceError` as soon as we reach the `console.log` statement:

```
VM124:4 Uncaught ReferenceError: belsoDoboz is not defined
```

This is because the `innerBox` is not visible from outside the box.

### Global scope

Similarly to other programming languages, JavaScript also has global variables. For instance, you have already used the global `console` variable to log messages. Besides `console`, open the Google Chrome developer tools console to explore other global variables:

```
> document.location.href
"http://zsoltnagy.eu"

> document.location.host
"zsoltnagy.eu"

> screen.width
1920

> let globalVariable = true
true

> globalVariable
true

> secondGlobalVariable = true
true

> secondGlobalVariable
true
```

As you can see, it is possible to create global variables in the global scope. It does not matter if you use `let`, `const`, or a `var` (see later) keyword to create these variables, or you just write an assignment.

In case of an assignment, the following happens:

- The program checks if there is a variable declared locally in the same block (`let`, `const`) or function (`var`).
- if not, the program checks blocks and functions encapsulating the block or function, where our variable was declared from inside - out. This is the process of accessing the *lexical scope*, and we will deal with this later in depth.
- If there are no variables defined in the lexical scope, the global scope is accessed, a global variable is created, and its value is set to the value of the assignment.

In the following example, we will only use blocks for simplicity, as we have not learned how function scope works.

```
// first file:

{
    let firstBox = 1;
    {
        firstBox = 2;
        secondBox = 3;
        console.log( firstBox, secondBox );
    }
}
```

If we execute the above code, the values `2 3` are printed to the console. The variable `firstBox` exists in the block encapsulating the block we are in. The variable `secondBox` was created using an assignment, and there are no `var`, `let`, or `const` variables declared with this name. Therefore, this variable exists in the *global scope*.

Now let's suppose the contents of the `first file` have been loaded, and we also load the following code segment titled `second file`:

```
// second file:

{
    let firstBox = 4;
    {
        console.log( firstBox, secondBox );
    }
}
```

Once we execute this code, the values `4 3` are printed. The variable `firstBox` is defined in the block outside the block of the `console.log`. The variable `secondBox` is global, and it was created when loading `firstFile`. The `secondBox` variable is from now on shared across all files that we load.

```
// third file:
console.log( secondBox );
```

Executing this code also has access to the `secondBox` global variable.

```
// fourth file:
console.log( firstBox );
```

The result of loading the `fourth file` is a `ReferenceError`, because `firstBox` does not exist inside this scope: it only exists within the block it was defined in `first file` and `second file`.

```
VM5519:1 Uncaught ReferenceError: firstBox is not defined
    at <anonymous>:1:14
```

A> When writing software, often times we create and maintain hundreds of thousands of lines of code, in some cases even millions. The number of files are usually in the hundreds if not in the thousands. As the size of your program grows, it becomes harder and harder to keep track of which code accesses and modifies which global variables in which order. Therefore, as a generic rule, it is advised to use locally scoped variables, while avoiding global variables whenever you can.

Using global variables is not advised. Most often the time, global variables are created because of a mistake from a developer. Remember, if you forget the `let`, `const`, or `var` keywords in front of a variable assignment, you create a global variable.

### The var keyword and function scope

In order to fully understand how the `var` keyword works, you need to know what functions are. We will learn functions later. For now, it is enough if you accept that variables declared using `var` are visible inside a function.

Functions can be created using the `function` keyword:

```
var globalBox = 2;
function scope() {
    var functionScopedBox = 1;
    console.log( globalBox );
}

scope(); // we call the function to execute its content
console.log( globalBox );
console.log( functionScopedBox );
```

The `globalBox` variable is accessible from everywhere in the code. However, when console logging the `functionScopedBox` variable in the last line, we get the following error message:

```
Uncaught ReferenceError: functionScopedBox is not defined
```

A> The scope of `var` variables is unique in JavaScript, and it often creates some confusion. In most programming langauges, developers are used to block scoped variables. Therefore, developers have a hard time getting used to how variables declared with `var` work:

```
{
    var box = true;
}
console.log( box );
```

This code is executed without problems, and the variable created inside the block is accessible also outside the block. This is a direct consequence of `box` being function scoped. As there are no functions encapsulating `box`, it is global scoped.

### Naming variables

Variables should be named in a descriptive way. We need to use the name of the variable to describe what kind of data it stores. A good variable name is like a good comment. Best practices for coming up with a good variable name include:

1. the variable describes its content in the best possible way,
2. from all possible variable names, choose the shortest name

For instance, out of `invoiceSum` and `invoiceItemSum`, the former perfectly grasps the essence of what the variable stores. This is because it is obvious that an invoice contains items without grasping this piece of information in the name of the variable.  

It is common practice to start writing variable names using lower case letters. If the variable name contains multiple words, we concatenate them as one word and capitalize the first letter of each word starting from the second word. This variable naming is called *camel case* (`camelCaseVariable`).

### Creating multiple variables in one statement

One programming best practice is to create all variables we use later to describe a procedure or function, and then perform all the operations on these variables. Example:

```
let name = "Zsolt";
let website = "zsoltnagy.eu";

console.log( name, website );
// other operations...
```

We can abbreviate the variable declarations by using a comma:

```
let name = "Zsolt",
    website = "zsoltnagy.eu";
```

Similarly, we can also declare variables and define them later:

```
let name, website;

name = "Zsolt";
website = "zsoltnagy.eu";
```

### Exercises: let, const, var


**Exercise 19:** Without running the code, determine what is written to the standard output:

```
let a;
console.log( 'a: ' + a );
a = 5;
console.log( 'a: ' + a );
```

**Exercise 20:** Without running the code, determine what is written to the standard output:

```
let a = 5;
{
    let a = 2;
    a += 1;
    console.log( 'a: ' + a );
}
console.log( 'a: ' + a );
```

**Exercise 21:** Without running the code, determine what is written to the standard output:

```
let a = 5;
{
    console.log( 'a: ' + a );
    let a = 2;
}
```

**Exercise 22:** In a previous section, we calculated the value of the `FF` hexadecimal number in base 10 and base 2. Change the code below such that we only run the `Number.parseInt( 'FF', 16 )` calculation once. Hint: use variables.

```
console.log(
    'FF in base 10:',
    Number.parseInt( 'FF', 16 ),
    '\nFF in base  2:',
    Number.parseInt( 'FF', 16 ).toString( 2 )
);
```

**Exercise 23:** Continue the previous exercise, and suggest another modification to introduce a variable that eliminates a duplicated calculation.

**Exercise 24:** Which variable names follow good naming conventions in real life software?

A. `variable`
B. `nowTimestamp`
C. `firstParameter`
D. `eurodollarrate`
